(Upbeat music)
All right, now we're going to learn
about creating elements.
Let's make a new JavaScript file,
let's just call it Creating.js.
If it's already there for you,
I'm not sure if I'll give you a starter or not,
but if it's already there for you just open it on up,
and then we want to, let's switch it,
so we'll get rid of the-dom.js and we'll call it creating.js
and let's just, console log.
It works, make sure that everything is working fine.
There we go.
Cool.
So if you wanna create elements,
you wanna create HTML in JavaScript,
it can be done a few different ways.
The main way is with the Document.createElement.
So let's just go look that up.
Document create element, MDN, and you can see,
like everything, there are good docs for it
and we can look it up.
So Document.createElement.
You give it a tagName, and then there are optional, options.
So this square brackets here, means that it is optional
when we're looking at the syntax of it and in here it says
an optional create, ElementCreationOptions which contains
a property named is, whose value is the tag name for
a custom element previously defined by customElements.
Oh this is part of Web components.
So unless you are doing anything with Web components,
which we are not, you don't really need that option.
So basically createElement takes a tagName and that's it.
So let's go ahead and make a paragraph tag.
So const myParagraph is equal to,
lets get rid of the sidebar here,
document.create element and then you pass set
what element you want.
So if we go to our thing and refresh, nothing is new there.
Let's consle.log it.
Consle.log, myParagraph.
There it is.
That's an actual paragraph element,
but its not on the page
and that's cause we actually haven't put it
on to the page yet.
We've just created it and it's in,
it's in what we call memory right now.
It's in JavaScript's memory.
So there is no sort of short cut to do something like,
I would love if you could do p.special,
if you wanted to give it a class
or maybe if you wanted to give it like an attribute,
of like title equals hey.
That is not possible via Document.createElement.
So if you want to add or remove,
or do anything with the attributes of it we must do it
the way that we've learned.
So we'll take myparagraph and
I'll just put textcontent is equal to I am a P,
and let's add a class to it.
So myparagraph.classlist, .add,
and we'll say special.
Now if we refresh, you see now
we've got that entire paragraph of class special and
I am a P.
So any of the attributes that we just learned
about in the last couple videos can be done exactly this way
because that is a bonafide element after using
Document.createElement.
Let's go ahead and make a couple more elements
and then we figure out how do we actually
put them in to the dom ourselves.
So lets make an image.
So const myImage is equal to document.createElement, image.
Image.source is equal to, let's grab this picsum.photos URL,
and let's console log.
Oh it's not img, its myImage.
Let's see how its going.
Beautiful.
We'll have to put an alt on there as well.
Nice photo,
there we go,
and then lets make a div.
So we just duplicate this and imma call it myDiv.
Div.
We'll give it a class.
We could maybe call it wrapper
and let's console log it,
myDiv.
All right good.
So we've got a paragraph, we've got an image,
and we have a wrapper.
Now the question is how do we add it to the page?
Well we use another API called appendChild,
so you actually need to go off and grab some sort of element
and call.appendChild against it.
So if you just want to dump it straight into the body,
like at the very bottom, right underneath here.
You can just grab the document.body,
so if you wanna grab the body tag
it's readily available to us.
You'll notice that I'm not saying const body
is equal to document.querySelector body,
and that is totally valid, nothing wrong with doing that,
it's just that the document actually gives us reference
to the body element quickly via a property.
It's not every element is accessible that way but
some of the popular ones like body are available to us
directly on the document so there's no need to actually
select the body element.
So document.body and then we'll call that appendChild
and appendChild, oh let's look it up.
AppendChild mdn.
The method to add a node,
so again a node can be either an element
or just a plain piece of text, which is the node.
By the specified, let's take a look.
The parameters it takes aChild,
(chuckles)
and that's it.
So let's go ahead and try that .appendChild,
let's try the
myParagraph
there it is.
I am a P, and if we inspect it you'll see
that it has injected it into the dom for us.
Now we could maybe say like myDiv,
and you'll see that the div is being popped
in there, oh its gotta class a wrapper,
so it's picking up that white text that I have
and then we can actually go a little bit further
and say myDiv.appendChild.
So appendChild can be called against any node,
so we can say appendChild,
we'll put the myParagraph inside of that.
Now I see, look at, it's showing up inside of there,
and the same thing can go for myImage,
and now we see that the image and the paragraph
is showing up.
Now its probably better to do that in a reverse order.
Why?
Because every single time that you use appendChild,
what you're doing is,
you're modifying the dom and that causes, in the browser,
what is called a reflow, meaning the browser goes,
"Oh, there's something new on the page, something changed,"
whether it's a piece of text change or whether it's a bunch
of, new elements have been added.
It says I need to repaint what is on the actual page
cause the browser is trying to convert this HTML
and CSS into what we see in the browser, right.
So if you're doing this three times really quickly,
you are triggering three concurrent, or not concurrent.
What is it when it comes one after another?
It's like a waterfall of reflows on the page.
So it does it one, two, three, and if you do that a lot
it can start to eat into other things on your page
and cause the experience to go down.
Most notably if you have animations or the user is scrolling
as this is happening it can start to cause
sort of a janky feeling for the user.
So what you can do is instead, you take myDiv.
You append the paragraph and you take myDiv
and you append the child,
and then before we've done anything, let's take a look,
so it's not on the page anywhere but if you take a look at
myDiv, you'll see that we have our wrapper,
and there's our paragraph and there's our images,
all inside of that and then we simply just do
one touch of the dom.
We dump it into the dom once and that will only cause
a reflower repaint once, which is great.
So there we go, look.
Looks great to us.
It actually, technically does two repaints.
Once when you dump the div in and
a second time once the image loads, so.
Its not the end of the world.
That's how the browser works,
you can do stuff to load it before it goes in,
but it's generally a little bit more work than it's worth.
So that is how,
that's one way to actually go ahead and create elements.
It's with the createElement API.
You may also find in your searches that there is just,
like element.append,
and let's look at the, here we go ParentNode.append.
You might find this where append allows you to inject
a node or a dom string into it,
and this is gonna work pretty similar.
You can see here there's still creating element
but they are just appending,
instead of appending a child and the,
there's some kind of nice stuff
that's coming up around that.
However it does not currently work in Internet Explorer
and it just, as I'm recording this, got into Edge.
So I would probably pump the breaks on that for,
maybe until September 2021.
So (chuckles) if you're listening to this after then,
go ahead and use it, but for now there's no sweat
in using appendChild.
There's also another API that I'm a big fan of,
and we've sort of looked at it's sibling,
and that is insertAdjacentElement.
So we looked at insertAdjacentText in order to add
text before and after elements and inside of it.
Pretty much the same API works with elements,
and this is really handy because,
let's say we have this div with the paragraph here,
and then you go, "Oh shoot!
"I need to add something to the front of that," right?
Like right here, so like, "Oh shoot! We need to
"add something to the top, like a heading!"
Let's do that.
So we'll say const heading is equal to
document.createElement, h1 probably h2,
and we'll take the heading.textcontent
we'll set that to Cool Things.
Now I wanna put the heading before this I am a P,
and if we were to take myDiv.appendChild
and append the heading.
It gets added after the fact, so that's where,
this really slick API,
and this is somewhat new but it is very well supported.
Look at that.
(making a prrrt sound)
Green all over the place, it works super well.
So it works like appendChild
but it's just insertAdjacentElement.
It takes two arguments, first where do you want it to go,
so we'll say, after begin,
and theN second what element do you wanna to append in
or what element do you wanna insert,
and we just pass a reference to our heading and
that will then pop it before the things
that we actually want.
We might say like what's the difference between that
and before begin, we looked at this kind of already
but what that will do is,
it will, it will insert it as sort of
a sibling to the actual wrapper, instead of inside of it.
So that's something that you may also need to use
if you have a list of cards,
and you need to put a card in between things,
you could like grab the second card and
then put it in right before the second card
and it'll slot itself right in the middle.
So insertAdjacentElement is pretty popular.
I like that one a lot.
Let's see one more example.
So I want you to create an unordered list
with five items in it, and I want you to do that,
all entirely with the APIs
that we have just learned ourselves.
So it should look a little bit something like this
and then inside of it,
I want like a li that says one, two, three, four, five,
and I want you to maybe start with the middle one
and then add one before.
Just make sure, try to use all of the APIs that we have.
So go ahead and pause it here and try to create that.
Inject it into the dom and then come back in just a second
and we will do that one together.
Welcome back.
Okay so let's make a list,
const list equals document.createElement.
Make an unordered list,
and we will then make some list items.
So const li is equal to,
okay I know we can do this a couple times over.
If this seems like a lot of code to write
just to make an unordered list it's because it kinda is
and in the next action I'm gonna show you how
we can actually write a little bit of HTML in a string
and inject it in,
but for now let's get comfortable with these.
We'll say li.textcontent is equal to one,
actually let's start in the middle, three.
Then we'll take our list and we'll appendChild,
li,
and then we'll say document.body.insertAdjacentElement.
Let's put it at the top.
So after begin,
my,
we'll call it list.
There we go.
So we got our unordered list being piped into the top here.
Looks good.
Let's go ahead and make a couple more, so li.
Let's do the fifth one we'll create an element,
li5.textcontent is equal to five.
Let's use the append API here.
So we'll take our list and we'll call append and
just pass it li5.
That should work just fine cause I'm not using IE or Edge.
Good, now (chuckles) this is like so much work,
and we don't know about loops and mapping yet
so we can't really make that faster.
There is something that I find myself needing to do
every now and then and that is the ability to clone a node.
So lets do li, li1 is equal to,
we'll take li5 and we'll call that clone node against it,
and what that will do is it will take
a copy of the actual element, and then we can append it.
So list.append, actually no we're gonna have to use
insertAdjacent if we wanna put it at the top,
so insertAdjacentElement and we will put it after begin
and we wanna put the li1 in there.
So I don't know if this is gonna work just yet, we'll see.
Well we got an element but it is empty,
and that is because we take a look
at the docs for cloneNode.
You'll see that it returns a duplicate of the node,
which this method is called,
so we take the node that we want, li5,
and we call cloneNode against it and the one argument that
we have is should it be deep.
So does that mean that the children
should also come along for the ride?
In our case the only child that we have of this element is
the actual text, and you might be thinking like,
"Wes isn't the text part of the element?"
And no it's a child of the element and even though,
so the fact that it's not wrapped in an element
like a span or a paragraph or something like that,
makes it just a regular node.
So what we have to do is pass true to this.
There we go but it still says five
so we could do li1.textcontent is equal to one.
There we go.
That wasn't any (chuckles) any shorter but you could see,
is if we had like a bunch of classes
and a bunch of child elements,
and a bunch of attributes added to that thing,
that might be very, very long to do and by cloning it
all of that will sort of come along with us.
I believe we can also tac .textcontent
on to the end of here.
No, no that's not gonna work, that's not gonna work.
Let's try, no see it's all red.
No that doesn't work.
Forget it.
That was a, that's a bad mistake.
You have to do it on its own line, in order to go ahead.
So we've got one, three, and five.
Now the question is how do I inject two and four,
well let's just go, I'm gonna copy this one here,
(computer beeps)
li4.
Call it four, and then we'll take our li5 and
call insertAdjacentElement and we will use
before begin because we want this to go beside
the fifth one, we'll use li5.
It didn't work.
Why not?
Do I have any errors here?
Oh we don't wanna, we wanna insert li,
we can't put an element into itself.
There we go, and then we just duplicate that real quick.
I think you get the point.
Feel free to end this video now if it's getting
a little bit boring for you.
So we'll take our li3, no two.
Li2,
and let's just take our first one li1
and we'll say after end, li2.
One, two, three, four, five,
so that is the worlds longest
way to create an unordered list.
Obviously that's not what you're gonna,
you're gonna be doing
if you need to create something so simple like that
but that was just a good practice in using
all of the different APIs that are available to us
to create elements, to set the content, to copy them,
to clone them, and to,
and to finally to insert them into different,
different ways.
In the next video we're gonna look at how
we can actually use back text and strings that actually
generate the HTML on a whim for us.